docs/core-tags.md, before:

# Core tags and attributes

Marko provides a number of tags

## Control flow

### `<if>`, `<else-if>`, `<else>`

The `<if>`, `<else-if>`, and `<else>` tags provide conditional control-flow for templates.

```marko
<if(arriving)>
    <div>Hey there</div>
</if>
<else-if(leaving)>
    <div>Bye now</div>
</else-if>
<else>
    <div>What's up?</div>
</else>
```

Conditionals may also be applied as attributes:

```marko
<div if(arriving)>Hey there</div>
<div else-if(leaving)>Bye now</div>
<div else>What's up?</div>
```

And support complex expressions:

```marko
<if(Math.random() > 0.5)>
    <div>50-50 chance of seeing this</div>
</if>
```

### `<for>`

The `<for>` tag allows iterating over an array of items:

```marko
<ul>
    <for(color in colors)>
        <li>${color}</li>
    </for>
</ul>
```

It may also be applied as an attribute:

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(color in colors)>${color}</li>
</ul>
```

With either of the above templates, and the following value for `colors`:

```js
var colors = ["red", "green", "blue"];
```

The output HTML would be the following:

```html
<ul>
    <li>red</li>
    <li>green</li>
    <li>blue</li>
</ul>
```

#### Loop Status Variable

The `for` directive also supports a loop status variable in case you need to know the current loop index. For example:

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(color in colors | status-var=loop)>
        ${color}
        ${loop.getIndex()+1}) of ${loop.getLength()}
        <if(loop.isFirst())> - FIRST</if>
        <if(loop.isLast())> - LAST</if>
    </li>
</ul>
```

##### Loop Status Methods

###### `getLength()`

Returns the length of the array

###### `getIndex()`

Returns the current loop index

###### `isFirst()`

Returns `true` if the current index is the first index, otherwise `false`

###### `isLast()`

Returns `true` if the current index is the last index, otherwise `false`

#### Loop Separator

Used for separating values in a loop by characters. The first element will not
be prefixed and the last element will not be suffixed with the `separator`:

```marko
<div>
    <!-- Output: red, green, blue -->
    <span for(color in colors | separator=", ") style="color: ${color}">
        ${color}
    </span>
</div>
```

#### Range Looping

A range can be provided in the following format; `<var-name> from <from> to <to>[ step <step>]`.

The `from`, `to` and `step` values must be numerical expressions. If not specified, step defaults to 1.

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(i from 0 to 10)>
        ${i}
    </li>
</ul>
```

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(i from 0 to 10 step 2)>
        ${i}
    </li>
</ul>
```

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(i from 0 to myArray.length-1)>
        ${myArray[i]}
    </li>
</ul>
```

#### Property Looping

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(name, value in settings)>
        <b>${name}</b>: ${value}
    </li>
</ul>
```

#### Native JavaScript for-loop

```marko
<for(var i=1; i<=3; i++)>
    ${i}
</for>
```

#### Custom Iterator

```marko
static function reverseIterator(arrayList, callback) {
    for(var i=arrayList.length-1; i>=0; i--){
        callback(arrayList[i]);
    }
}

<div for(item in ['a', 'b', 'c'] | iterator=reverseIterator)>
    ${item}
</div>
```

Output:

```html
<div>c</div>
<div>b</div>
<div>a</div>
```

### `<while>`

Any element can be repeated until a condition is met by using the `while` directive. The directive can be applied as an element or as an attribute.

_Applied as an attribute:_

```marko
$ var n = 0;

<ul>
    <li while(n < 4)>
        ${n++}
    </li>
</ul>
```

_Applied as an element:_

```marko
$ var n = 0;

<ul>
    <while(n < 4)>
        <li>${n++}</li>
    </while>
</ul>
```

### `body-only-if`

If you find that you have a wrapper element that is conditional, but whose body should always be rendered then you can use the `body-only-if` attribute to handle this use case. For example, to only render a wrapping `<a>` tag if there is a valid URL then you could do the following:

```marko
<a href=input.linkUrl body-only-if(!input.linkUrl)>
    Some body content
</a>
```

Given a value of `"http://localhost/"` for the `input.linkUrl` variable: , the output would be the following:

```marko
<a href="http://localhost/">
    Some body content
</a>
```

Given a value of `undefined` for the `input.linkUrl` variable: , the output would be the following:

```marko
Some body content
```

## JavaScript

The following tags are always written using the [concise syntax](./concise.md), even when using HTML syntax for tags that generate HTML output.

### `import`

> **Static:** The code generated by `import` will run once when the template is loaded and be shared by all calls to render. It must be declared as a top level tag and does not have access to `data`, `state`, or other values passed in at render.

The `import` tag is used to access data and functions from external files. It follows the same syntax as the [JavaScript `import` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/import).

```marko
import sum from './utils/sum';
<div>The sum of 2 + 3 is ${sum(2, 3)}</div>
```

<!-- ### `<export>`
> **Static:** The code generated by `export` will run once when the template is loaded and be shared by all calls to render. It must be declared as a top level tag and does not have access to `data`, `state`, or other values passed in at render.

The `export` tag is used to export values from the template.  It follows the same syntax as the [JavaScript `export` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/export), but only named exports are supported (the default export is the template).

```marko
export var route = '/about';

<!doctype html>
<html>
    <body>
        <h1>About us</h1>
    </body>
</html>
``` -->

## Reusable content

### `<include>`

The include tag is used to embed another template (or part of another template) in the current template.

The include tag can take a path to a template as the first argument:

```marko
<include('./path/to/template.marko')/>
```

The second argument may be used to pass input to the included template:

```marko
<include('./path/to/template.marko', { name:'Frank' })/>
```

Attributes may also be used to pass data to the included template and can be used in combination with the input parameter:

```marko
<include('./path/to/template.marko', data) name="Frank"/>
```

You can also include imported UI compoments (or a reference to a load UI component):

```marko
import Hello from './components/hello/index.marko';

<include(Hello) name='Frank' />

// Include a reference to a UI component:
<include(input.myDynamicComponent) name='Frank' />
```

#### Layouts with nested attributes

In addition to including external content, you can inject additional content chunks into the external content. This is accomplished by using nested attribute tags which are denoted by the `@` symbol:

_page.marko_

```marko
<include('./layout.marko')>
    <@body>
        <h1>Hello Marko</h1>
    </@body>
</include>
```

Then in your layout template you can include the injected content:

_layout.marko_

```marko
<!doctype html>
<html>
    <body>
        <!-- this comes from <@body> -->
        <include(input.body)/>
    </body>
</html>
```

<!--
- You can use many nested attribute tags for multiple injection points
- You can have repeated nested attribute tags by using `marko-tag.json` (components only)
- You can add additional attributes to an nested attribute tag
- You can pass data to a nested attribute tag's body?
-->

### `<include-text>`

```marko
<include-text('./foo.txt')/>
```

Special HTML characters will be escaped. If you do not want escaping then use the `<include-html>` tag (see below).

### `<include-html>`

```marko
<include-html('./foo.html')/>
```

Special HTML characters will _not_ be escaped since the file is expected to be an HTML file.

### `<macro>`

Parameterized macros allow for reusable fragments within an HTML template.
A macro can be defined using the `<macro>` directive.

```marko
<macro greeting(name, count)>
    Hello ${name}! You have ${count} new messages.
</macro>
```

The above macro can then be invoked as part of any expression. The following
sample template shows how to use macro functions inside expressions:

```marko
<macro greeting(name, count)>
    Hello ${name}! You have ${count} new messages.
</macro>
<p>
    <greeting("John", 10)/>
</p>
<p>
    <!-- Or, using named attributes: -->
    <greeting name="Frank" count=20/>
</p>
```

## Async content

### `<await>`

The `<await>` tag is used to dynamically load in content from a data provider. The data provider can be a `Promise` or a `callback`. Once the provider returns it's results the children are rendered.

await-example.marko

```marko
$ var personPromise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    setTimeout(function() {
        resolve({
            name: 'Frank'
        });
    }, 1000);
});

<await(person from personPromise)>
    <div>Hello ${person.name}!</div>
</await>
```

Advanced implementation:

* `<await>` tag signature
  * Basic usage: `<await(results from dataProvider)>...</await>`
  * Optional attributes
    * client-reorder `boolean`
    * arg `expression`
    * arg-\* `string`
    * method `string`
    * timeout `integer`
    * timeout-message `string`
    * error-message `string`
    * placeholder `string`
    * renderTimeout `function`
    * renderError `function`
    * renderPlaceholder `function`
    * name `string`
    * scope `expression`
    * show-after `string`
  * Optional child tags
    * `<await-placeholder>Loading...</await-placeholder>`
    * `<await-timeout>Request timed out</await-timeout>`
    * `<await-error>Request errored</await-error>`

## Comments

Standard HTML comments can be used to add comments to your template. The HTML comments will not show up in the rendered HTML.

Example comments:

```marko
<!-- This is a comment that will not be rendered -->
<h1>Hello</h1>
```

```js
// You can also use standard JavaScript-style comments
/*
 Block comments are also supported
 */
--Hello;
```

If you would like for your HTML comment to show up in the final output then you can use the custom `html-comment` tag.

### `<html-comment>`

_input.marko_

```marko
<html-comment>This is a comment that *will* be rendered</html-comment>
<h1>Hello</h1>
```

_output.html_

```html
<!--This is a comment that *will* be rendered-->
<h1>Hello</h1>
```

Alternatively, the `<marko-compiler-options>` tag may be used to configure comments for the entire template:

```marko
<marko-compiler-options preserve-comments/>
```

## Compiler options

### `marko-preserve-whitespace`

Whitespace can be preserved using the `preserve-whitespace` attribute:

```marko
<div marko-preserve-whitespace>
    All of this
    whitespace   will
    be preserved.
</div>
```

Alternatively, the `<marko-compiler-options>` tag may be used to configure whitespace for the entire template:

```marko
<marko-compiler-options preserve-whitespace/>
```

### `marko-body`

The `marko-body` attribute can be used to control how body content is parsed. The following values are supported:

* `html` - Body content will be parsed HTML (the default)
* `static-text` - Body content will be parsed as static text (HTML tags will be ignored). Placeholders will be ignored.
* `parsed-text` - Body content will be parsed as text (HTML tags will be ignored). Placeholders will not be ignored.

_input.marko_

```marko
<div marko-body="static-text">
    This is just one
    <span if(foo)>
            Hello ${THIS IS NOT VALID}!
    </span>
    big text block
</div>
```

_output.html_

```html
<div>
    This is just one
    &lt;span if(foo)&gt;
        Hello ${THIS IS NOT VALID}!
    &lt;/span&gt;
    big text block
</div>
```

Commit message:

replace include with dynamic tag in docs

docs/core-tags.md, after:

# Core tags and attributes

Marko provides a number of tags

## Control flow

### `<if>`, `<else-if>`, `<else>`

The `<if>`, `<else-if>`, and `<else>` tags provide conditional control-flow for templates.

```marko
<if(arriving)>
    <div>Hey there</div>
</if>
<else-if(leaving)>
    <div>Bye now</div>
</else-if>
<else>
    <div>What's up?</div>
</else>
```

Conditionals may also be applied as attributes:

```marko
<div if(arriving)>Hey there</div>
<div else-if(leaving)>Bye now</div>
<div else>What's up?</div>
```

And support complex expressions:

```marko
<if(Math.random() > 0.5)>
    <div>50-50 chance of seeing this</div>
</if>
```

### `<for>`

The `<for>` tag allows iterating over an array of items:

```marko
<ul>
    <for(color in colors)>
        <li>${color}</li>
    </for>
</ul>
```

It may also be applied as an attribute:

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(color in colors)>${color}</li>
</ul>
```

With either of the above templates, and the following value for `colors`:

```js
var colors = ["red", "green", "blue"];
```

The output HTML would be the following:

```html
<ul>
    <li>red</li>
    <li>green</li>
    <li>blue</li>
</ul>
```

#### Loop Status Variable

The `for` directive also supports a loop status variable in case you need to know the current loop index. For example:

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(color in colors | status-var=loop)>
        ${color}
        ${loop.getIndex()+1}) of ${loop.getLength()}
        <if(loop.isFirst())> - FIRST</if>
        <if(loop.isLast())> - LAST</if>
    </li>
</ul>
```

##### Loop Status Methods

###### `getLength()`

Returns the length of the array

###### `getIndex()`

Returns the current loop index

###### `isFirst()`

Returns `true` if the current index is the first index, otherwise `false`

###### `isLast()`

Returns `true` if the current index is the last index, otherwise `false`

#### Loop Separator

Used for separating values in a loop by characters. The first element will not
be prefixed and the last element will not be suffixed with the `separator`:

```marko
<div>
    <!-- Output: red, green, blue -->
    <span for(color in colors | separator=", ") style="color: ${color}">
        ${color}
    </span>
</div>
```

#### Range Looping

A range can be provided in the following format; `<var-name> from <from> to <to>[ step <step>]`.

The `from`, `to` and `step` values must be numerical expressions. If not specified, step defaults to 1.

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(i from 0 to 10)>
        ${i}
    </li>
</ul>
```

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(i from 0 to 10 step 2)>
        ${i}
    </li>
</ul>
```

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(i from 0 to myArray.length-1)>
        ${myArray[i]}
    </li>
</ul>
```

#### Property Looping

```marko
<ul>
    <li for(name, value in settings)>
        <b>${name}</b>: ${value}
    </li>
</ul>
```

#### Native JavaScript for-loop

```marko
<for(var i=1; i<=3; i++)>
    ${i}
</for>
```

#### Custom Iterator

```marko
static function reverseIterator(arrayList, callback) {
    for(var i=arrayList.length-1; i>=0; i--){
        callback(arrayList[i]);
    }
}

<div for(item in ['a', 'b', 'c'] | iterator=reverseIterator)>
    ${item}
</div>
```

Output:

```html
<div>c</div>
<div>b</div>
<div>a</div>
```

### `<while>`

Any element can be repeated until a condition is met by using the `while` directive. The directive can be applied as an element or as an attribute.

_Applied as an attribute:_

```marko
$ var n = 0;

<ul>
    <li while(n < 4)>
        ${n++}
    </li>
</ul>
```

_Applied as an element:_

```marko
$ var n = 0;

<ul>
    <while(n < 4)>
        <li>${n++}</li>
    </while>
</ul>
```

### `body-only-if`

If you find that you have a wrapper element that is conditional, but whose body should always be rendered then you can use the `body-only-if` attribute to handle this use case. For example, to only render a wrapping `<a>` tag if there is a valid URL then you could do the following:

```marko
<a href=input.linkUrl body-only-if(!input.linkUrl)>
    Some body content
</a>
```

Given a value of `"http://localhost/"` for the `input.linkUrl` variable: , the output would be the following:

```marko
<a href="http://localhost/">
    Some body content
</a>
```

Given a value of `undefined` for the `input.linkUrl` variable: , the output would be the following:

```marko
Some body content
```

## JavaScript

The following tags are always written using the [concise syntax](./concise.md), even when using HTML syntax for tags that generate HTML output.

### `import`

> **Static:** The code generated by `import` will run once when the template is loaded and be shared by all calls to render. It must be declared as a top level tag and does not have access to `data`, `state`, or other values passed in at render.

The `import` tag is used to access data and functions from external files. It follows the same syntax as the [JavaScript `import` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/import).

```marko
import sum from './utils/sum';
<div>The sum of 2 + 3 is ${sum(2, 3)}</div>
```

<!-- ### `<export>`
> **Static:** The code generated by `export` will run once when the template is loaded and be shared by all calls to render. It must be declared as a top level tag and does not have access to `data`, `state`, or other values passed in at render.

The `export` tag is used to export values from the template.  It follows the same syntax as the [JavaScript `export` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/export), but only named exports are supported (the default export is the template).

```marko
export var route = '/about';

<!doctype html>
<html>
    <body>
        <h1>About us</h1>
    </body>
</html>
``` -->

## `<${dynamic}>`

```marko
<${useDiv ? 'div' : 'span'}>
    Hello there!
</>
```

The `<${dynamic}>` tag is used to render a tag, component, or transcluded content that isn't determined until runtime.

### Dynamic components

The `<${dynamic}>` tag can be used to embed another template in the current template:

```marko
import componentA from "./path/to/component-a.marko";
import componentB from "./path/to/component-b.marko";

<${useA ? componentA : componentB} name="Frank"/>
```

You can also switch between a normal HTML tag and a Marko component:

```marko
import FancyButton from "./path/to/fancy-button.marko";

<${isFancy ? FancyButton : 'button'}>
    Button text
</>
```

### Layouts and transcluded content

You can pass transcluded content to a tag using nested attribute tags which are denoted by the `@` symbol:

_page.marko_

```marko
<layout>
    <@body>
        <h1>Hello Marko</h1>
    </@body>
</layout>
```

Then in your layout template you can render the transcluded content using the `<${dynamic}>` tag:

_layout.marko_

```marko
<!doctype html>
<html>
    <body>
        <!-- this comes from <@body> -->
        <${input.body}/>
    </body>
</html>
```

<!--
- You can use many nested attribute tags for multiple injection points
- You can have repeated nested attribute tags by using `marko-tag.json` (components only)
- You can add additional attributes to an nested attribute tag
- You can pass data to a nested attribute tag's body?
-->

### `<include-text>`

```marko
<include-text('./foo.txt')/>
```

Special HTML characters will be escaped. If you do not want escaping then use the `<include-html>` tag (see below).

### `<include-html>`

```marko
<include-html('./foo.html')/>
```

Special HTML characters will _not_ be escaped since the file is expected to be an HTML file.

### `<macro>`

Parameterized macros allow for reusable fragments within an HTML template.
A macro can be defined using the `<macro>` directive.

```marko
<macro greeting(name, count)>
    Hello ${name}! You have ${count} new messages.
</macro>
```

The above macro can then be invoked as part of any expression. The following
sample template shows how to use macro functions inside expressions:

```marko
<macro greeting(name, count)>
    Hello ${name}! You have ${count} new messages.
</macro>
<p>
    <greeting("John", 10)/>
</p>
<p>
    <!-- Or, using named attributes: -->
    <greeting name="Frank" count=20/>
</p>
```

## Async content

### `<await>`

The `<await>` tag is used to dynamically load in content from a data provider. The data provider can be a `Promise` or a `callback`. Once the provider returns it's results the children are rendered.

await-example.marko

```marko
$ var personPromise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    setTimeout(function() {
        resolve({
            name: 'Frank'
        });
    }, 1000);
});

<await(person from personPromise)>
    <div>Hello ${person.name}!</div>
</await>
```

Advanced implementation:

* `<await>` tag signature
  * Basic usage: `<await(results from dataProvider)>...</await>`
  * Optional attributes
    * client-reorder `boolean`
    * arg `expression`
    * arg-\* `string`
    * method `string`
    * timeout `integer`
    * timeout-message `string`
    * error-message `string`
    * placeholder `string`
    * renderTimeout `function`
    * renderError `function`
    * renderPlaceholder `function`
    * name `string`
    * scope `expression`
    * show-after `string`
  * Optional child tags
    * `<await-placeholder>Loading...</await-placeholder>`
    * `<await-timeout>Request timed out</await-timeout>`
    * `<await-error>Request errored</await-error>`

## Comments

Standard HTML comments can be used to add comments to your template. The HTML comments will not show up in the rendered HTML.

Example comments:

```marko
<!-- This is a comment that will not be rendered -->
<h1>Hello</h1>
```

```js
// You can also use standard JavaScript-style comments
/*
 Block comments are also supported
 */
--Hello;
```

If you would like for your HTML comment to show up in the final output then you can use the custom `html-comment` tag.

### `<html-comment>`

_input.marko_

```marko
<html-comment>This is a comment that *will* be rendered</html-comment>
<h1>Hello</h1>
```

_output.html_

```html
<!--This is a comment that *will* be rendered-->
<h1>Hello</h1>
```

Alternatively, the `<marko-compiler-options>` tag may be used to configure comments for the entire template:

```marko
<marko-compiler-options preserve-comments/>
```

## Compiler options

### `marko-preserve-whitespace`

Whitespace can be preserved using the `preserve-whitespace` attribute:

```marko
<div marko-preserve-whitespace>
    All of this
    whitespace   will
    be preserved.
</div>
```

Alternatively, the `<marko-compiler-options>` tag may be used to configure whitespace for the entire template:

```marko
<marko-compiler-options preserve-whitespace/>
```

### `marko-body`

The `marko-body` attribute can be used to control how body content is parsed. The following values are supported:

* `html` - Body content will be parsed HTML (the default)
* `static-text` - Body content will be parsed as static text (HTML tags will be ignored). Placeholders will be ignored.
* `parsed-text` - Body content will be parsed as text (HTML tags will be ignored). Placeholders will not be ignored.

_input.marko_

```marko
<div marko-body="static-text">
    This is just one
    <span if(foo)>
            Hello ${THIS IS NOT VALID}!
    </span>
    big text block
</div>
```

_output.html_

```html
<div>
    This is just one
    &lt;span if(foo)&gt;
        Hello ${THIS IS NOT VALID}!
    &lt;/span&gt;
    big text block
</div>
```
