docs/custom-taglibs.md, before:

Custom Taglibs
==============

# Tag Renderer

Every tag should be mapped to an object with a `render(input, out)` function. The render function is just a function that takes two arguments: `input` and `out`. The `input` argument is an arbitrary object that contains the input data for the renderer. The `out` argument is an [asynchronous writer](https://github.com/marko-js/async-writer) that wraps an output stream. Output can be produced using `out.write(someString)` There is no class hierarchy or tie-ins to Marko when implementing a tag renderer. A simple tag renderer is shown below:

```javascript
exports.render = function(input, out) {
    out.write('Hello ' + input.name + '!');
}
```

If, and only if, a tag has nested content, then a special `renderBody` method will be added to the `input` object. If a renderer wants to render the nested body content then it must call the `renderBody` method. For example:

```javascript
exports.render = function(input, out) {
    out.write('BEFORE BODY');
    if (input.renderBody) {
        input.renderBody(out);
    }
    out.write('AFTER BODY');
}
```
For users of Marko Widgets: Invoking `input.renderBody` is equivalent to using the `w-body` attribute for tags (in conjunction with the `getInitialBody()` lifecycle method; see [getInitialBody()](https://github.com/marko-js/marko-widgets#getinitialbodyinput-out)).

A tag renderer should be mapped to a custom tag by creating a `marko.json` as shown in the next few sections.

# marko.json

## Sample Taglib

```json
{
    "tags": {
        "my-hello": {
            "renderer": "./hello-renderer",
            "attributes": {
                "name": "string"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Marko also supports a short-hand for declaring tags and attributes. The following `marko.json` is equivalent to the `marko.json` above:

```json
{
    "<my-hello>": {
        "renderer": "./hello-renderer",
        "@name": "string"
    }
}
```

The short-hand will be used for the remaining of this documentation.

# Defining Tags

Tags can be defined by adding `"<tag_name>": <tag_def>` properties to your `marko.json`:

```json
{
    "<my-hello>": {
        "renderer": "./hello-renderer",
        "@name": "string"
    },
    "<my-foo>": {
        "renderer": "./foo-renderer",
        "@*": "string"
    },
    "<my-bar>": "./path/to/my-bar/marko-tag.json",
    "<my-baz>": {
        "template": "./baz-template.marko"
    },
}
```

Every tag should be associated with a renderer or a template. When a custom tag is used in a template, the renderer (or template) will be invoked at render time to produce the HTML/output. If a `String` path to a `marko-tag.json` for a custom tag then the target `marko-tag.json` is loaded to define the tag.

# Defining Attributes

If you provide attributes then the Marko compiler will do validation to make sure only the supported attributes are provided. A wildcard attribute (`"@*"`) allows any attribute to be passed in. Below are sample attribute definitions:

_Multiple attributes:_

```javascript
{
    "@message": "string",     // String
    "@my-data": "expression", // JavaScript expression
    "@*": "string"            // Everything else will be added to a special "*" property
}
```

# Scanning for Tags

Marko supports a directory scanner to make it easier to maintain a taglib by introducing a few conventions:

* When compiling a template Marko will search starting at template's directory, up to the project root for directories named `components/` (similar to the way `node_modules/` is found)
* The `components/` directory contains a directory for each tag
* One tag per directory
* All tag directories should be direct children of `components/`
* The name of the tag directory will be the name of the tag
* Every tag directory must contain a `renderer.js` that is used as the tag renderer or, alternatively, a `template.marko`
* Each tag directory may contain a `marko-tag.json` file or the tag definition can be embedded into `renderer.js`

Given the following directory structure:
* __components/__
    * __my-foo/__
        * template.marko
    * __my-bar/__
        * renderer.js
        * marko-tag.json
* __page/__
    * __components/__
        * __my-hello/__
            * renderer.js
    * __page.marko__

The following three tags will be found when rendering `page.marko`:

* `<my-hello>`
* `<my-foo>`
* `<my-bar>`

Directory scanning only supports one tag per directory and it will only look at directories one level deep. The tag definition can be embedded into the `renderer.js` file or it can be put into a separate `marko-tag.json`. For example:

_In `renderer.js`:_

```javascript
exports.tag = {
    "@name": "string"
}
```

_In `marko-tag.json`:_

```javascript
{
    "@name": "string"
}
```

_NOTE: It is not necessary to declare the `renderer` since the scanner will automatically use `renderer.js` as the renderer._

## Configuring the directory

You can also specify the `tags-dir` value in your `marko.json` to configure the name of the directory:

```json
{
    "tags-dir": "./components"
}
```

`tags-dir` also accepts an array if you have taglibs organized in multiple folders.

```json
{
    "tags-dir": ["./components", "./modules"]
}
```

_NOTE: If a `marko.json` file exists, a `components/` directory will **not** be automatically discovered at that level._

# Nested Tags

It is often necessary for tags to have a parent/child or ancestor/descendent relationship. For example:

```xml
<ui-tabs orientation="horizontal">
    <ui-tabs:tab title="Home">
        Content for Home
    </ui-tabs:tab>
    <ui-tabs:tab title="Profile">
        Content for Profile
    </ui-tabs:tab>
    <ui-tabs:tab title="Messages">
        Content for Messages
    </ui-tabs:tab>
</ui-tabs>
```

Nested tags can be declared in the parent tag's `marko-tag.json` as shown below:

___ui-tabs/marko-tag.json___

```json
{
    "@orientation": "string",
    "@tabs <tab>[]": {
        "@title": "string"
    }
}
```

This allows a `tabs` to be provided using nested `<ui-tabs:tab>` tags or the tabs can be provided as a `tabs` attribute (e.g. `<ui-tabs tabs="[tab1, tab2, tab3]"`). The nested `<ui-tabs:tab>` tags will be made available to the renderer as part of the `tabs` property for the parent `<ui-tabs>`. Because of the `[]` suffix on `<tab>[]` the tabs property will be of type `Array` and not a single object. That is, the `[]` suffix is used to declare that a nested tag can be repeated. The sample renderer that accesses the nested tabs is shown below:

___ui-tabs/renderer.js___

```javascript
var template = require('./template.marko');

exports.renderer = function(input, out) {
    var tabs = input.tabs;

    // Tabs will be in the following form:
    // [
    //     {
    //         title: 'Home',
    //         renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    //     },
    //     {
    //         title: 'Profile',
    //         renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    //     },
    //     {
    //         title: 'Messages',
    //         renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    //     }
    // ]
    console.log(tabs.length); // Output: 3

    template.render({
        tabs: tabs
    }, out);

};
```

Finally, the template to render the `<ui-tabs>` component will be similar to the following:

___ui-tabs/template.marko___

```xml
<div class="tabs">
    <ul class="nav nav-tabs">
        <li class="tab" for(tab in data.tabs)>
            <a href="#${tab.title}">
                ${tab.title}
            </a>
        </li>
    </ul>
    <div class="tab-content">
        <div class="tab-pane" for(tab in data.tabs)>
            <invoke tab.renderBody(out)/>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>
```

Below is an example of using nested tags that are not repeated:

```xml
<ui-overlay>
    <ui-overlay:header class="my-header">
        Header content
    </ui-overlay:header>

    <ui-overlay:body class="my-body">
        Body content
    </ui-overlay:body>

    <ui-overlay:footer class="my-footer">
        Footer content
    </ui-overlay:footer>
</ui-overlay>
```

The `marko-tag.json` for the `<ui-overlay>` tag will be similar to the following:

___ui-overlay/marko-tag.json___

```json
{
    "@header <header>": {
        "@class": "string"
    },
    "@body <body>": {
        "@class": "string"
    },
    "@footer <footer>": {
        "@class": "string"
    }
}
```

The renderer for the `<ui-overlay>` tag will be similar to the following:

```javascript
var template = require('./template.marko');

exports.renderer = function(input, out) {
    var header = input.header;
    var body = input.body;
    var footer = input.footer;

    // NOTE: header, body and footer will be of the following form:
    //
    // {
    //     'class': 'my-header',
    //     renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    // }

    template.render({
        header: header,
        body: body,
        footer: footer
    }, out);

};
```

Finally, the sample template to render the `<ui-overlay>` tag is shown below:

```xml
<div class="overlay">
    <!-- Header -->
    <div class="overlay-header ${data.header['class']}" if(data.header)>
        <invoke data.header.renderBody(out)/>
    </div>

    <!-- Body -->
    <div class="overlay-body ${data.body['class']}" if(data.body)>
        <invoke data.body.renderBody(out)/>
    </div>

    <!-- Footer -->
    <div class="overlay-footer ${data.footer['class']}" if(data.footer)>
        <invoke data.footer.renderBody(out)/>
    </div>
</div>
```

# Taglib Discovery

Given a template file, the `marko` module will automatically discover all taglibs by searching relative to the template file. The taglib discoverer will automatically import all taglibs associated with packages found as dependencies in the containing package's root `package.json` file.

As an example, given a template at path `/my-project/src/pages/login/template.marko` and given a `/my-project/package.json` similar to the following:

```json
{
    "name": "my-package",
    "dependencies": {
        "foo": "1.0.0"
    },
    "devDependencies": {
        "bar": "1.0.0"
    }
}
```

The search path will be the following:

1. `/my-project/src/pages/login/marko.json`
2. `/my-project/src/pages/marko.json`
3. `/my-project/src/marko.json`
4. `/my-project/marko.json`
5. `/my-project/node_modules/foo/marko.json`
6. `/my-project/node_modules/bar/marko.json`

If you wish to hide particular folder and/or node_module from discovery of marko.json, you can exclude those from the search with:

```javascript
    require('marko/compiler').taglibFinder.excludeDir(dirPath);
    // Where 'dirPath' is an absolute path to the folder containing marko.json

    require('marko/compiler').taglibFinder.excludePackage(packageName);
    // Where 'packageName' is the name of the node_module containing marko.json
```

Those statements should be used before any marko rendering happened in the process.

Commit message:

add documentation for excluding directories from the taglib finder

docs/custom-taglibs.md, after:

Custom Taglibs
==============

# Tag Renderer

Every tag should be mapped to an object with a `render(input, out)` function. The render function is just a function that takes two arguments: `input` and `out`. The `input` argument is an arbitrary object that contains the input data for the renderer. The `out` argument is an [asynchronous writer](https://github.com/marko-js/async-writer) that wraps an output stream. Output can be produced using `out.write(someString)` There is no class hierarchy or tie-ins to Marko when implementing a tag renderer. A simple tag renderer is shown below:

```javascript
exports.render = function(input, out) {
    out.write('Hello ' + input.name + '!');
}
```

If, and only if, a tag has nested content, then a special `renderBody` method will be added to the `input` object. If a renderer wants to render the nested body content then it must call the `renderBody` method. For example:

```javascript
exports.render = function(input, out) {
    out.write('BEFORE BODY');
    if (input.renderBody) {
        input.renderBody(out);
    }
    out.write('AFTER BODY');
}
```
For users of Marko Widgets: Invoking `input.renderBody` is equivalent to using the `w-body` attribute for tags (in conjunction with the `getInitialBody()` lifecycle method; see [getInitialBody()](https://github.com/marko-js/marko-widgets#getinitialbodyinput-out)).

A tag renderer should be mapped to a custom tag by creating a `marko.json` as shown in the next few sections.

# marko.json

## Sample Taglib

```json
{
    "tags": {
        "my-hello": {
            "renderer": "./hello-renderer",
            "attributes": {
                "name": "string"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Marko also supports a short-hand for declaring tags and attributes. The following `marko.json` is equivalent to the `marko.json` above:

```json
{
    "<my-hello>": {
        "renderer": "./hello-renderer",
        "@name": "string"
    }
}
```

The short-hand will be used for the remaining of this documentation.

# Defining Tags

Tags can be defined by adding `"<tag_name>": <tag_def>` properties to your `marko.json`:

```json
{
    "<my-hello>": {
        "renderer": "./hello-renderer",
        "@name": "string"
    },
    "<my-foo>": {
        "renderer": "./foo-renderer",
        "@*": "string"
    },
    "<my-bar>": "./path/to/my-bar/marko-tag.json",
    "<my-baz>": {
        "template": "./baz-template.marko"
    },
}
```

Every tag should be associated with a renderer or a template. When a custom tag is used in a template, the renderer (or template) will be invoked at render time to produce the HTML/output. If a `String` path to a `marko-tag.json` for a custom tag then the target `marko-tag.json` is loaded to define the tag.

# Defining Attributes

If you provide attributes then the Marko compiler will do validation to make sure only the supported attributes are provided. A wildcard attribute (`"@*"`) allows any attribute to be passed in. Below are sample attribute definitions:

_Multiple attributes:_

```javascript
{
    "@message": "string",     // String
    "@my-data": "expression", // JavaScript expression
    "@*": "string"            // Everything else will be added to a special "*" property
}
```

# Scanning for Tags

Marko supports a directory scanner to make it easier to maintain a taglib by introducing a few conventions:

* When compiling a template Marko will search starting at template's directory, up to the project root for directories named `components/` (similar to the way `node_modules/` is found)
* The `components/` directory contains a directory for each tag
* One tag per directory
* All tag directories should be direct children of `components/`
* The name of the tag directory will be the name of the tag
* Every tag directory must contain a `renderer.js` that is used as the tag renderer or, alternatively, a `template.marko`
* Each tag directory may contain a `marko-tag.json` file or the tag definition can be embedded into `renderer.js`

Given the following directory structure:
* __components/__
    * __my-foo/__
        * template.marko
    * __my-bar/__
        * renderer.js
        * marko-tag.json
* __page/__
    * __components/__
        * __my-hello/__
            * renderer.js
    * __page.marko__

The following three tags will be found when rendering `page.marko`:

* `<my-hello>`
* `<my-foo>`
* `<my-bar>`

Directory scanning only supports one tag per directory and it will only look at directories one level deep. The tag definition can be embedded into the `renderer.js` file or it can be put into a separate `marko-tag.json`. For example:

_In `renderer.js`:_

```javascript
exports.tag = {
    "@name": "string"
}
```

_In `marko-tag.json`:_

```javascript
{
    "@name": "string"
}
```

_NOTE: It is not necessary to declare the `renderer` since the scanner will automatically use `renderer.js` as the renderer._

## Configuring the directory

You can also specify the `tags-dir` value in your `marko.json` to configure the name of the directory:

```json
{
    "tags-dir": "./components"
}
```

`tags-dir` also accepts an array if you have taglibs organized in multiple folders.

```json
{
    "tags-dir": ["./components", "./modules"]
}
```

_NOTE: If a `marko.json` file exists, a `components/` directory will **not** be automatically discovered at that level._

### Excluding directories

By excluding a directory, Marko will not search it for a `components/` directory or a `marko.json` file.

```js
require('marko/compiler/taglib-finder').excludeDir('./')
```

# Nested Tags

It is often necessary for tags to have a parent/child or ancestor/descendent relationship. For example:

```xml
<ui-tabs orientation="horizontal">
    <ui-tabs:tab title="Home">
        Content for Home
    </ui-tabs:tab>
    <ui-tabs:tab title="Profile">
        Content for Profile
    </ui-tabs:tab>
    <ui-tabs:tab title="Messages">
        Content for Messages
    </ui-tabs:tab>
</ui-tabs>
```

Nested tags can be declared in the parent tag's `marko-tag.json` as shown below:

___ui-tabs/marko-tag.json___

```json
{
    "@orientation": "string",
    "@tabs <tab>[]": {
        "@title": "string"
    }
}
```

This allows a `tabs` to be provided using nested `<ui-tabs:tab>` tags or the tabs can be provided as a `tabs` attribute (e.g. `<ui-tabs tabs="[tab1, tab2, tab3]"`). The nested `<ui-tabs:tab>` tags will be made available to the renderer as part of the `tabs` property for the parent `<ui-tabs>`. Because of the `[]` suffix on `<tab>[]` the tabs property will be of type `Array` and not a single object. That is, the `[]` suffix is used to declare that a nested tag can be repeated. The sample renderer that accesses the nested tabs is shown below:

___ui-tabs/renderer.js___

```javascript
var template = require('./template.marko');

exports.renderer = function(input, out) {
    var tabs = input.tabs;

    // Tabs will be in the following form:
    // [
    //     {
    //         title: 'Home',
    //         renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    //     },
    //     {
    //         title: 'Profile',
    //         renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    //     },
    //     {
    //         title: 'Messages',
    //         renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    //     }
    // ]
    console.log(tabs.length); // Output: 3

    template.render({
        tabs: tabs
    }, out);

};
```

Finally, the template to render the `<ui-tabs>` component will be similar to the following:

___ui-tabs/template.marko___

```xml
<div class="tabs">
    <ul class="nav nav-tabs">
        <li class="tab" for(tab in data.tabs)>
            <a href="#${tab.title}">
                ${tab.title}
            </a>
        </li>
    </ul>
    <div class="tab-content">
        <div class="tab-pane" for(tab in data.tabs)>
            <invoke tab.renderBody(out)/>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>
```

Below is an example of using nested tags that are not repeated:

```xml
<ui-overlay>
    <ui-overlay:header class="my-header">
        Header content
    </ui-overlay:header>

    <ui-overlay:body class="my-body">
        Body content
    </ui-overlay:body>

    <ui-overlay:footer class="my-footer">
        Footer content
    </ui-overlay:footer>
</ui-overlay>
```

The `marko-tag.json` for the `<ui-overlay>` tag will be similar to the following:

___ui-overlay/marko-tag.json___

```json
{
    "@header <header>": {
        "@class": "string"
    },
    "@body <body>": {
        "@class": "string"
    },
    "@footer <footer>": {
        "@class": "string"
    }
}
```

The renderer for the `<ui-overlay>` tag will be similar to the following:

```javascript
var template = require('./template.marko');

exports.renderer = function(input, out) {
    var header = input.header;
    var body = input.body;
    var footer = input.footer;

    // NOTE: header, body and footer will be of the following form:
    //
    // {
    //     'class': 'my-header',
    //     renderBody: function(out) { ... }
    // }

    template.render({
        header: header,
        body: body,
        footer: footer
    }, out);

};
```

Finally, the sample template to render the `<ui-overlay>` tag is shown below:

```xml
<div class="overlay">
    <!-- Header -->
    <div class="overlay-header ${data.header['class']}" if(data.header)>
        <invoke data.header.renderBody(out)/>
    </div>

    <!-- Body -->
    <div class="overlay-body ${data.body['class']}" if(data.body)>
        <invoke data.body.renderBody(out)/>
    </div>

    <!-- Footer -->
    <div class="overlay-footer ${data.footer['class']}" if(data.footer)>
        <invoke data.footer.renderBody(out)/>
    </div>
</div>
```

# Taglib Discovery

Given a template file, the `marko` module will automatically discover all taglibs by searching relative to the template file. The taglib discoverer will automatically import all taglibs associated with packages found as dependencies in the containing package's root `package.json` file.

As an example, given a template at path `/my-project/src/pages/login/template.marko` and given a `/my-project/package.json` similar to the following:

```json
{
    "name": "my-package",
    "dependencies": {
        "foo": "1.0.0"
    },
    "devDependencies": {
        "bar": "1.0.0"
    }
}
```

The search path will be the following:

1. `/my-project/src/pages/login/marko.json`
2. `/my-project/src/pages/marko.json`
3. `/my-project/src/marko.json`
4. `/my-project/marko.json`
5. `/my-project/node_modules/foo/marko.json`
6. `/my-project/node_modules/bar/marko.json`

If you wish to hide particular folder and/or node_module from discovery of marko.json, you can exclude those from the search with:

```javascript
    require('marko/compiler').taglibFinder.excludeDir(dirPath);
    // Where 'dirPath' is an absolute path to the folder containing marko.json

    require('marko/compiler').taglibFinder.excludePackage(packageName);
    // Where 'packageName' is the name of the node_module containing marko.json
```

Those statements should be used before any marko rendering happened in the process.
