docs/installing.md, before:

# Installation

## Trying out Marko

If you just want to play around with Marko in the browser, head on over to our [Try Online](https://markojs.com/try-online) feature.  You'll be able to develop a Marko application right in your browser.

## Creating new apps

If you're starting from scratch, [`marko-devtools`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/marko-devtools) provides a starter app to
get you going quickly. To get started:

```bash
npm install marko-devtools --global
marko create hello-world
cd hello-world
npm install # or yarn
npm start
```

## Direct usage

### Installing

The Marko compiler runs on [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) and can be installed using [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/marko/tutorial):

```
npm install marko --save
```

or using [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com):

```
yarn add marko
```

### In the browser

Let's say we have a simple view that we want to render in the browser: `hello.marko`

_hello.marko_
```xml
<h1>Hello ${input.name}</h1>
```

First, let's create a `client.js` that requires the view and renders it to the body:

_client.js_
```js
var helloComponent = require('./hello');

helloComponent.renderSync({ name:'Marko' })
    .appendTo(document.body);
```

We will also create a barebones HTML page to host our application:

_index.html_
```
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Marko Example</title>
</head>
<body>

</body>
</html>
```

Now, we need to bundle these files for use in the browser.  We can use a tool called [`lasso`](https://github.com/lasso-js/lasso) to do that for us, so let's get it (and the marko plugin) installed:

```
npm install --global lasso-cli
npm install --save lasso-marko
```

Now we can build our bundle for the browser:

```
lasso --main client.js --plugins lasso-marko --inject-into index.html
```

This builds a `client.js` file to the newly created `static/` directory and injects the required `<script>` tags into our HTML page to load our application in the browser.  If we had css in the view then `<link>` tags would have also been added.

Load up that page in your browser and you should see `Hello Marko` staring back at you.

### On the server

#### Require Marko views

Marko provides a custom Node.js require extension that allows you to `require` Marko views exactly like a standard JavaScript module. Take the following example `server.js`:

_hello.marko_
```xml
<div>
    Hello ${input.name}!
</div>
```

_server.js_
```js
// The following line installs the Node.js require extension
// for `.marko` files.  This should be called once near the start
// of your application before requiring any `*.marko` files.
require('marko/node-require');

var fs = require('fs');

// Load a Marko view by requiring a .marko file:
var hello = require('./hello');
var out = fs.createWriteStream('hello.html', { encoding: 'utf8' });
hello.render({ name: 'Frank' }, out);
```

Using the Node.js require extension is completely optional. If you prefer to not use the Node.js require extension then you will need to precompile all of the marko templates using [Marko DevTools](https://github.com/marko-js/marko-devtools):

```bash
marko compile hello.marko
```

This will produce a `hello.js` file next to the original template. The generated `.js` file will be what gets loaded by the Node.js runtime. If is important to leave off the `.marko` extension when requiring a Marko template so that the `.js` will be resolved correctly.

> **ProTip:** You can easily compile all of the Marko templates in your package while also recompiling when a file is modified using the following command:
> ```bash
> marko compile --watch
> ```

#### Serving a simple page

Let's update `server.js` to serve the view from an http server:

_server.js_
```js
// Allow requiring `.marko` files
require('marko/node-require');

var http = require('http');
var hello = require('./hello');
var port = 8080;

http.createServer((req, res) => {
    // let the browser know html is coming
    res.setHeader('content-type', 'text/html');

    // render the output to the `res` output stream
    hello.render({ name:'Marko' }, res);
}).listen(port);
```

And give `hello.marko` some content:

_hello.marko_
```xml
<h1>Hello ${input.name}</h1>
```

Start the server (`node server.js`) and open your browser to [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) where you should see the heading `Hello Marko`.

#### Initializing server-rendered components

Marko automatically injects a list of components that need to be mounted in the browser, right before the closing `</body>` tag (as such, it required that you include a `<body>` in your rendered output).  

However, you still need to bundle the CSS & JavaScript for your page and include the proper `link`, `style`, and `script` tags.  Luckily, the `lasso` taglib will do all the heavy lifting for you.

First install `lasso` and `lasso-marko`:

```
npm install --save lasso lasso-marko
```

Next, in your page or layout view, add the `lasso-head` and `lasso-body` tags:

_layout.marko_
```xml
<!doctype>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Hello world</title>
    <lasso-head/>
</head>
<body>
    <include(input.body)/>
    <lasso-body/>
</body>
</html>
```

Finally, configure your server to serve the static files that `lasso` generates:

_server.js_
```js
app.use(require('lasso/middleware').serveStatic());
```

Commit message:

update install guide require hook section

docs/installing.md, after:

# Installation

## Trying out Marko

If you just want to play around with Marko in the browser, head on over to our [Try Online](https://markojs.com/try-online) feature.  You'll be able to develop a Marko application right in your browser.

## Creating new apps

If you're starting from scratch, [`marko-devtools`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/marko-devtools) provides a starter app to
get you going quickly. To get started:

```bash
npm install marko-devtools --global
marko create hello-world
cd hello-world
npm install # or yarn
npm start
```

## Direct usage

### Installing

The Marko compiler runs on [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) and can be installed using [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/marko/tutorial):

```
npm install marko --save
```

or using [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com):

```
yarn add marko
```

### In the browser

Let's say we have a simple view that we want to render in the browser: `hello.marko`

_hello.marko_
```xml
<h1>Hello ${input.name}</h1>
```

First, let's create a `client.js` that requires the view and renders it to the body:

_client.js_
```js
var helloComponent = require('./hello');

helloComponent.renderSync({ name:'Marko' })
    .appendTo(document.body);
```

We will also create a barebones HTML page to host our application:

_index.html_
```
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Marko Example</title>
</head>
<body>

</body>
</html>
```

Now, we need to bundle these files for use in the browser.  We can use a tool called [`lasso`](https://github.com/lasso-js/lasso) to do that for us, so let's get it (and the marko plugin) installed:

```
npm install --global lasso-cli
npm install --save lasso-marko
```

Now we can build our bundle for the browser:

```
lasso --main client.js --plugins lasso-marko --inject-into index.html
```

This builds a `client.js` file to the newly created `static/` directory and injects the required `<script>` tags into our HTML page to load our application in the browser.  If we had css in the view then `<link>` tags would have also been added.

Load up that page in your browser and you should see `Hello Marko` staring back at you.

### On the server

#### Require Marko views

Marko provides a custom Node.js require extension that allows you to `require` Marko views exactly like a standard JavaScript module. Take the following example `server.js`:

_hello.marko_
```xml
<div>
    Hello ${input.name}!
</div>
```

_server.js_
```js
// The following line installs the Node.js require extension
// for `.marko` files.  This should be called once near the start
// of your application before requiring any `*.marko` files.
require('marko/node-require');

var fs = require('fs');

// Load a Marko view by requiring a .marko file:
var hello = require('./hello');
var out = fs.createWriteStream('hello.html', { encoding: 'utf8' });
hello.render({ name: 'Frank' }, out);
```

Using the Node.js require extension is completely optional. If you prefer to not use the Node.js require extension then you will need to precompile all of the marko templates using [Marko DevTools](https://github.com/marko-js/marko-devtools):


```bash
marko compile hello.marko
```

This will produce a `hello.js` file next to the original template. The generated `.js` file will be what gets loaded by the Node.js runtime. It is important to leave off the `.marko` extension when requiring a Marko template so that the `.js` will be resolved correctly.

If you wish to only use the require extension in development, you can conditionally require it.
```js
if (!process.env.NODE_ENV) {
    require('marko/node-require');
}
```

#### Serving a simple page

Let's update `server.js` to serve the view from an http server:

_server.js_
```js
// Allow requiring `.marko` files
require('marko/node-require');

var http = require('http');
var hello = require('./hello');
var port = 8080;

http.createServer((req, res) => {
    // let the browser know html is coming
    res.setHeader('content-type', 'text/html');

    // render the output to the `res` output stream
    hello.render({ name:'Marko' }, res);
}).listen(port);
```

And give `hello.marko` some content:

_hello.marko_
```xml
<h1>Hello ${input.name}</h1>
```

Start the server (`node server.js`) and open your browser to [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) where you should see the heading `Hello Marko`.

#### Initializing server-rendered components

Marko automatically injects a list of components that need to be mounted in the browser, right before the closing `</body>` tag (as such, it required that you include a `<body>` in your rendered output).  

However, you still need to bundle the CSS & JavaScript for your page and include the proper `link`, `style`, and `script` tags.  Luckily, the `lasso` taglib will do all the heavy lifting for you.

First install `lasso` and `lasso-marko`:

```
npm install --save lasso lasso-marko
```

Next, in your page or layout view, add the `lasso-head` and `lasso-body` tags:

_layout.marko_
```xml
<!doctype>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Hello world</title>
    <lasso-head/>
</head>
<body>
    <include(input.body)/>
    <lasso-body/>
</body>
</html>
```

Finally, configure your server to serve the static files that `lasso` generates:

_server.js_
```js
app.use(require('lasso/middleware').serveStatic());
```
