docs/syntax.md, before:

# Syntax

Marko's syntax is based on HTML, so you basically already know it. Marko extends the HTML language to add a few nice features which we'll cover here.

> **ProTip:** Marko also supports a [beautiful concise syntax](./concise.md). If you'd prefer to see our documentation using this syntax, just click the `switch syntax` button in the corner of any Marko code sample.

## Text replacement

When you render a Marko template, you pass input data that is then available within the template as `input`. You can then use `${}` to insert a value into the template:

```marko
<div>
    Hello ${input.name}
</div>
```

You can actually pass any JavaScript expression here and the result of the expression will be inserted into the HTML output:

```marko
<div>
    Hello ${'world'.toUpperCase()}
</div>
```

These values are automatically escaped so you don't accidentally insert malicious code. If you do need to pass unescaped HTML, you can use `$!{}`:

```marko
<div>
    Hello $!{htmlThatWillNotBeEscaped}
</div>
```

### Escaping placeholders

If necessary, you can escape `$` using a backslash to have it be treated as text instead of a placeholder token:

```marko
<div>
    Placeholder example: <code>\${input}</code>
</div>
```

## Root level text

Text at the root of a template (outside any tags) must be prefixed with the [concise syntax's `--`](./concise.md#text) to denote it is text. The parser starts in concise mode and would otherwise try to parse what you meant to be text as a concise tag declaration.

```marko
-- Root level text
```

## Typed attributes

A big improvement over HTML are the typed attributes Marko provides (instead of just strings).

```marko
<div class=input.myClassName/>
<input type="checkbox" checked=input.isChecked/>

<tag string="Hello"/>
<tag number=1/>
<tag template-string=`Hello ${name}`/>
<tag boolean=true/>
<tag array=[1, 2, 3]/>
<tag object={hello: 'world'}/>
<tag variable=name/>
<tag function-call=input.foo()/>
```

### Attribute expressions

Any JavaScript expression is a valid attribute value, provided it meets the following criteria:

_It does not contain any spaces_

```marko
<tag sum=1+2 difference=3-4/>
```

```marko
tag sum=1+2 difference=3-4
```

_Spaces are contained within matching `()`, `[]`, or `{}`_

```marko
<tag sum=(1 + 2) difference=(3 - 4)/>
```

```marko
tag sum=(1 + 2) difference=(3 - 4)
```

_Or, commas are used to delimit attributes_

```marko
<tag sum=1 + 2, difference=3 - 4/>
```

```marko
tag sum=1 + 2, difference=3 - 4
```

> **Note:** If you use commas to separate two attributes, you must use commas to separate _all_ attributes for that tag.

#### Attribute whitespace

Whitespace may optionally be used around the equal sign of an attribute:

```marko
<tag value = 5/>
```

```marko
tag value = 5
```

### Boolean attributes

HTML defines the following rules for [boolean attributes](https://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD-html5-20080610/semantics.html#boolean):

> The presence of a boolean attribute on an element represents the true value, and the absence of the attribute represents the false value.

In Marko, if an attribute value expression evaluates to `null` or `false` then the attribute is not included in the output. If an attribute value is `true`, only the attribute name is included in the output.

```marko
<input type="checkbox" checked=true>
<input type="checkbox" checked=false>
```

Would render to the following HTML:

```html
<input type="checkbox" checked /> <input type="checkbox" />
```

#### Conditional attributes

You can take advantage of the way Marko handles boolean attributes to conditionally render attributes:

```marko
<div class=(active && 'tab-active')>Hello</div>
```

With a value of `true` for `active`, the output would be the following:

```html
<div class="tab-active">Hello</div>
```

With a value of `false` for `active`, the output would be the following:

```html
<div>Hello</div>
```

### Dynamic attributes

You can use the `...attrs` syntax inside an open tag to merge in the properties of an object as attributes to a tag:

_index.js_

```js
template.render({ attrs: { class: "active", href: "https://ebay.com/" } });
```

_link.marko_

```marko
<a ...input.attrs target="_blank">eBay</a>
```

would output the following HTML:

_output.html_

```html
<a class="active" href="https://ebay.com/" target="_blank">eBay</a>
```

### Style attribute

You can pass a string as the value of `style` just as you would in HTML, but Marko also supports passing an object or array as the value of the `style` attribute:

```marko
<!-- string: -->
<div style='display:block;margin-right:16px'/>

<!-- object: -->
<div style={ display: 'block', color:false, marginRight: 16 }/>

<!-- array: -->
<div style=['display:block', null, { marginRight: 16 }]/>
```

In all cases, the output will be the same:

Output:

```html
<div style="display:block;margin-right:16px;"></div>
```

### Class attribute

The `class` attribute also support object expressions or array expressions (in addition to a string value) as shown below:

```marko
<!-- string: -->
<div class="a c"/>

<!-- object: -->
<div class={ a:true, b:false, c:true }/>

<!-- array: -->
<div class=['a', null, { c:true }]/>
```

In all cases, the output will be the same:

_output.html_

```html
<div class="a c"></div>
```

## Shorthand attributes

Marko provides a shorthand for declaring classes and ids on an element:

_source.marko_

```marko
<div.my-class/>
<span#my-id/>
<button#submit.primary.large/>
```

Yields this HTML:

_output.html_

```html
<div class="my-class"></div>
<span id="my-id"></span> <button id="submit" class="primary large"></button>
```

## Directives

Directives are denoted by parenthesis and take an argument instead of a value. Many directives may be used as both tags and attributes.

```marko
<if(true)>
    <strong>Marko is awesome</strong>
</if>
```

Below is the same `if()` directive used as an attribute:

```marko
<strong if(true)>
    Marko is awesome
</strong>
```

Most directives support JavaScript expressions, others allow a custom syntax:

```marko
<for(item in items)/>
```

Directives are used by many of our [Core Tags](./core-tags.md) for control-flow (`<if>`, `<else-if>`, `<for>`, etc.) and other features. You can also use them in your own [Custom Tags](./custom-tags.md).

## Inline JavaScript

> **ProTip:** If you find yourself writing a lot of inline JS, consider moving it out to an external file and then [`import`](./core-tags.md#codeimportcode) it.

To execute JavaScript in your template you can insert a Javascript statement using the `$ <code>` syntax.

A line that starts with a `$` followed by a space will execute the code that follows.

```marko
$ var name = input.name;

<div>
    Hello, ${name}
    $ console.log('The value rendered was', name);
</div>
```

A statement may continue onto subsequent lines if new lines are bounded by `{}`, `[]`, `()`, ` `` `, or `/**/`:

```marko
$ var person = {
    name: 'Frank',
    age: 32
};
```

Multiple statements or an unbounded statement may be used by wrapping the statement(s) in a block:

```marko
$ {
    var bgColor = getRandomColor();
    var textColor = isLight(bgColor)
        ? 'black'
        : 'white';
}
```

### Static JavaScript

> **Static:** The JavaScript code that follows `static` will run once when the template is loaded and be shared by all calls to render. It must be declared at the top level and does not have access to values passed in at render.

Inline JavaScript will run each time your template is rendered, if you only want to initialize some values once, use the `static` keyword:

```marko
static var count = 0;
static var formatter = new Formatter();

static function sum(a, b) {
    return a + b;
};

<div>${formatter.format(sum(2, 3))}</div>
```

Like inline Javascript, multiple statements or an unbounded statement may be used by wrapping the statement(s) in a block:

```marko
static {
    var base = 2;
    function sum(a, b) {
        return base + a + b;
    };
}
```

### Escaping dollar signs

If you need to output a `$` at the beginning of a line, you can escape it: `\$`.

```marko
<p>You can run JS in a Marko template like this:</p>
<code>
    \$ var num = 123;
</code>
```

Commit message:

update to new htmljs-parser which supports pipe params, add flagged tag param migration (#1236)
* update to new htmljs-parser which supports pipe params, add flagged tag param migration

docs/syntax.md, after:

# Syntax

Marko's syntax is based on HTML, so you basically already know it. Marko extends the HTML language to add a few nice features which we'll cover here.

> **ProTip:** Marko also supports a [beautiful concise syntax](./concise.md). If you'd prefer to see our documentation using this syntax, just click the `switch syntax` button in the corner of any Marko code sample.

## Text replacement

When you render a Marko template, you pass input data that is then available within the template as `input`. You can then use `${}` to insert a value into the template:

```marko
<div>
    Hello ${input.name}
</div>
```

You can actually pass any JavaScript expression here and the result of the expression will be inserted into the HTML output:

```marko
<div>
    Hello ${'world'.toUpperCase()}
</div>
```

These values are automatically escaped so you don't accidentally insert malicious code. If you do need to pass unescaped HTML, you can use `$!{}`:

```marko
<div>
    Hello $!{htmlThatWillNotBeEscaped}
</div>
```

### Escaping placeholders

If necessary, you can escape `$` using a backslash to have it be treated as text instead of a placeholder token:

```marko
<div>
    Placeholder example: <code>\${input}</code>
</div>
```

## Root level text

Text at the root of a template (outside any tags) must be prefixed with the [concise syntax's `--`](./concise.md#text) to denote it is text. The parser starts in concise mode and would otherwise try to parse what you meant to be text as a concise tag declaration.

```marko
-- Root level text
```

## Typed attributes

A big improvement over HTML are the typed attributes Marko provides (instead of just strings).

```marko
<div class=input.myClassName/>
<input type="checkbox" checked=input.isChecked/>

<tag string="Hello"/>
<tag number=1/>
<tag template-string=`Hello ${name}`/>
<tag boolean=true/>
<tag array=[1, 2, 3]/>
<tag object={hello: 'world'}/>
<tag variable=name/>
<tag function-call=input.foo()/>
```

### Attribute expressions

Any JavaScript expression is a valid attribute value, provided it meets the following criteria:

_It does not contain any spaces_

```marko
<tag sum=1+2 difference=3-4/>
```

```marko
tag sum=1+2 difference=3-4
```

_Spaces are contained within matching `()`, `[]`, or `{}`_

```marko
<tag sum=(1 + 2) difference=(3 - 4)/>
```

```marko
tag sum=(1 + 2) difference=(3 - 4)
```

_Or, commas are used to delimit attributes_

```marko
<tag sum=1 + 2, difference=3 - 4/>
```

```marko
tag sum=1 + 2, difference=3 - 4
```

> **Note:** If you use commas to separate two attributes, you must use commas to separate _all_ attributes for that tag.

#### Attribute whitespace

Whitespace may optionally be used around the equal sign of an attribute:

```marko
<tag value = 5/>
```

```marko
tag value = 5
```

### Boolean attributes

HTML defines the following rules for [boolean attributes](https://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD-html5-20080610/semantics.html#boolean):

> The presence of a boolean attribute on an element represents the true value, and the absence of the attribute represents the false value.

In Marko, if an attribute value expression evaluates to `null` or `false` then the attribute is not included in the output. If an attribute value is `true`, only the attribute name is included in the output.

```marko
<input type="checkbox" checked=true>
<input type="checkbox" checked=false>
```

Would render to the following HTML:

```html
<input type="checkbox" checked /> <input type="checkbox" />
```

#### Conditional attributes

You can take advantage of the way Marko handles boolean attributes to conditionally render attributes:

```marko
<div class=(active && 'tab-active')>Hello</div>
```

With a value of `true` for `active`, the output would be the following:

```html
<div class="tab-active">Hello</div>
```

With a value of `false` for `active`, the output would be the following:

```html
<div>Hello</div>
```

### Dynamic attributes

You can use the `...attrs` syntax inside an open tag to merge in the properties of an object as attributes to a tag:

_index.js_

```js
template.render({ attrs: { class: "active", href: "https://ebay.com/" } });
```

_link.marko_

```marko
<a ...input.attrs target="_blank">eBay</a>
```

would output the following HTML:

_output.html_

```html
<a class="active" href="https://ebay.com/" target="_blank">eBay</a>
```

### Style attribute

You can pass a string as the value of `style` just as you would in HTML, but Marko also supports passing an object or array as the value of the `style` attribute:

```marko
<!-- string: -->
<div style='display:block;margin-right:16px'/>

<!-- object: -->
<div style={ display: 'block', color:false, marginRight: 16 }/>

<!-- array: -->
<div style=['display:block', null, { marginRight: 16 }]/>
```

In all cases, the output will be the same:

Output:

```html
<div style="display:block;margin-right:16px;"></div>
```

### Class attribute

The `class` attribute also support object expressions or array expressions (in addition to a string value) as shown below:

```marko
<!-- string: -->
<div class="a c"/>

<!-- object: -->
<div class={ a:true, b:false, c:true }/>

<!-- array: -->
<div class=['a', null, { c:true }]/>
```

In all cases, the output will be the same:

_output.html_

```html
<div class="a c"></div>
```

## Shorthand attributes

Marko provides a shorthand for declaring classes and ids on an element:

_source.marko_

```marko
<div.my-class/>
<span#my-id/>
<button#submit.primary.large/>
```

Yields this HTML:

_output.html_

```html
<div class="my-class"></div>
<span id="my-id"></span> <button id="submit" class="primary large"></button>
```

## Tag body parameters

Tags can define parameters that are available to their body content. This is a powerful feature that allows components to provide functionality and data while giving you full control over what gets rendered.

In the following example, `<mouse>` provides a parameter which we have named `position`:

```marko
<mouse|position|>
   The mouse is at ${position.x}, ${position.y}!
</mouse>
```

> `<mouse>` would [render its body](./core-tags.md#layouts-and-transcluded-content) and provide the position similar to this: `<${input} x=0 y=0/>`.

> **Pro Tip**: Tag |parameters| are treated as regular JavaScript function parameters. This means you can destructure, set default values, etc.
>
> ```
> <mouse|{ x, y }|>
>   The mouse is at ${x}, ${y}!
> </mouse>
> ```

> **Warning**: These are tag _body_ parameters. Parameters are not available to attributes, only to the tag body.
>
> ```
> <mouse|position| something=position>
>   ReferenceError when setting the "something" attribute
> </mouse>
> ```

## Directives

Directives are denoted by parenthesis and take an argument instead of a value. Many directives may be used as both tags and attributes.

```marko
<if(true)>
    <strong>Marko is awesome</strong>
</if>
```

Below is the same `if()` directive used as an attribute:

```marko
<strong if(true)>
    Marko is awesome
</strong>
```

Most directives support JavaScript expressions, others allow a custom syntax:

```marko
<for(item in items)/>
```

Directives are used by many of our [Core Tags](./core-tags.md) for control-flow (`<if>`, `<else-if>`, `<for>`, etc.) and other features. You can also use them in your own [Custom Tags](./custom-tags.md).

## Inline JavaScript

> **ProTip:** If you find yourself writing a lot of inline JS, consider moving it out to an external file and then [`import`](./core-tags.md#codeimportcode) it.

To execute JavaScript in your template you can insert a Javascript statement using the `$ <code>` syntax.

A line that starts with a `$` followed by a space will execute the code that follows.

```marko
$ var name = input.name;

<div>
    Hello, ${name}
    $ console.log('The value rendered was', name);
</div>
```

A statement may continue onto subsequent lines if new lines are bounded by `{}`, `[]`, `()`, ` `` `, or `/**/`:

```marko
$ var person = {
    name: 'Frank',
    age: 32
};
```

Multiple statements or an unbounded statement may be used by wrapping the statement(s) in a block:

```marko
$ {
    var bgColor = getRandomColor();
    var textColor = isLight(bgColor)
        ? 'black'
        : 'white';
}
```

### Static JavaScript

> **Static:** The JavaScript code that follows `static` will run once when the template is loaded and be shared by all calls to render. It must be declared at the top level and does not have access to values passed in at render.

Inline JavaScript will run each time your template is rendered, if you only want to initialize some values once, use the `static` keyword:

```marko
static var count = 0;
static var formatter = new Formatter();

static function sum(a, b) {
    return a + b;
};

<div>${formatter.format(sum(2, 3))}</div>
```

Like inline Javascript, multiple statements or an unbounded statement may be used by wrapping the statement(s) in a block:

```marko
static {
    var base = 2;
    function sum(a, b) {
        return base + a + b;
    };
}
```

### Escaping dollar signs

If you need to output a `$` at the beginning of a line, you can escape it: `\$`.

```marko
<p>You can run JS in a Marko template like this:</p>
<code>
    \$ var num = 123;
</code>
```
